---
id: 3W5tuqjuQFPtB6zhj81qx
title: Latex
desc: ''
updated: 1642560061302
created: 1642040398950
---

## Citations

This is surprisingly a fucking mess, despite being the best tool.

https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/25701/bibtex-vs-biber-and-biblatex-vs-natbib

bibtex and biber are external programs. These are the database formats for actually storing the .bib file. This is generated by Zotero.

bibtex is the older format, and biber is the newer one.

natbib and biblatex are the actual latex packages used to insert citation keys and generate bibliographies automatically in latex.

natbib is the older one, and *usually* preferred for compatibility reasons. Most journals have .sty files available for natbib.

However, in general .sty files are quite old and most prefer CSL, or some other article package. E.g. Elsevier has the elsarticle class for latex documents.

## natbib

Make sure you re-define the bibliography build options so that the bibliography command is bibtex!

Original honours thesis was written using natbib as a backend, seems to be tried and true...

## biblatex

Try to use biblatex for the future. Presumably this is fully backwards compatible anyway...

This uses biber as a backend, and should be backwards compatible. 

Make sure Zotero exports a biblatex formatted .bib file! (actually just export both to be safe...)

biblatex is the recommended one for being newer, and should be able to emulate natbib using the backend=natbib command.

Make sure you re-define the bibliography build options so that the bibliography command is biber!

biber itself is another external program. Install it via homebrew, AUR or some other package repo.

\textcite for usual in text citations

\cite for bare citation

\parencite for parenthesis citation

\smartcite for an attempt at trying be context dependent

## Macros

Good practice to save all macros to a .sty file and then load them in like a package

The physics package, although formulated for physics, contains many useful macros out of the box...

## Tables

texStudio by default supoorts tabular and tabbing environments

tabular is the standard one and cannot be broken across pages

tabbing can be broken across pages

longtable is separate and tends to be better for extremely long tables that break multiple times

https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/310518/when-to-use-tabbing